tree: Improve non-schema aware typing (#22763)
microsoft/FluidFramework: .changeset/shiny-swans-relax.md

---
"fluid-framework": minor
"@fluidframework/tree": minor
---
---
"section": tree
---

Improve typing when exact TypeScript type for a schema is not provided

The Tree APIs are designed to be used in a strongly typed way, with the full TypeScript type for the schema always being provided.

> Due to limitations of the TypeScript language, there was not a practical way to prevent less descriptive types, like `TreeNodeSchema` or `ImplicitFieldSchema` from being used where the type of a specific schema was intended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to limitations of the TypeScript language, there was no practical way to prevent less descriptive types, like `TreeNodeSchema` or `ImplicitFieldSchema`, from being used where the type of a specific schema was intended.
```

Code which does this will encounter several issues with tree APIs, and this change fixes some of those issues.

> This change  mainly fixes that `NodeFromSchema<TreeNodeSchema>` used to return `unknown` and now returns `TreeNode | TreeLeafValue`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change mainly fixes that `NodeFromSchema<TreeNodeSchema>` used to return `unknown` and now returns `TreeNode | TreeLeafValue`.
```

This change by itself seems mostly harmless, as it just improves the precision of the typing in this one edge case.

> Unfortunately there are other typing bugs which complicate the situation, resulting in APIs for inserting data into the tree to also behave poorly when given non-specific types like `TreeNodeSchema`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, there are other typing bugs which complicate the situation, causing APIs for inserting data into the tree to also behave poorly when given non-specific types like `TreeNodeSchema`.
```

These APIs include cases like `TreeView.initialize`.

> This incorrectly allowed some usage like taking a type erased schema and initial tree pair, and creating a view of type `TreeView<ImplicitFieldSchema>` then initializing a it.

Reviewer 2: Nit
```suggestion
This incorrectly allowed some usage like taking a type-erased schema and initial tree pair, creating a view of type `TreeView<ImplicitFieldSchema>`, then initializing it.
```

With the typing being partly fixed, some unsafe inputs are still allowed when trying to initialize such a view, but some are now prevented.

> While this use-case of modifying in code not strongly typed by the exact schema, was not intended to be supported,

Reviewer 2: This clause is a bit hard to parse, I think there might be a typo here, but I'm not sure what the intention was.

it did mostly work, and has some real use-cases (like tests looping over test data pairs of schema and tree data).
To help mitigate the impact of this change, some experimental `@alpha` APis have been introduced.

Before this change:

```typescript
import { TinyliciousClient } from "@fluidframework/tinylicious-client";
import {
	SchemaFactory,
	SharedTree,
	TreeViewConfiguration,
	type TreeNodeSchema,
} from "fluid-framework";

// Create a ITree instance
const tinyliciousClient = new TinyliciousClient();
const { container } = await tinyliciousClient.createContainer({ initialObjects: {} }, "2");
const tree = await container.create(SharedTree);

const schemaFactory = new SchemaFactory("demo");

// Bad: This loses the schema aware type information. `: TreeNodeSchema` should be omitted to preserve strong typing.
const schema: TreeNodeSchema = schemaFactory.array(schemaFactory.number);
const config = new TreeViewConfiguration({ schema });

> // This view is typed as `TreeView<TreeNodeSchema>`, which does not work well since its missing the actual schema type information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// This view is typed as `TreeView<TreeNodeSchema>`, which does not work well since it's missing the actual schema type information.
```

> // This view is types as `TreeView<TreeNodeSchema>`, which does not work well since its missing the actual schema type information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// This view is typed as `TreeView<TreeNodeSchema>`, which does not work well since its missing the actual schema type information.
```

const view = tree.viewWith(config);
// Root is typed as `unknown` allowing invalid assignment operations.
view.root = "invalid";
view.root = {};
// Since all assignments are allowed, valid ones still work:
view.root = [];
```

After this change:

```typescript
// Root is now typed as `TreeNode | TreeLeafValue`, still allowing some invalid assignment operations.

> // In the future this should be prevented as well, since the type of the setter in this case should ne `never`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// In the future this should be prevented as well, since the type of the setter in this case should be `never`.
```

view.root = "invalid";
// This no longer compiles:
view.root = {};

> // This also longer compiles:

Reviewer: ?
```suggestion
// This is still valid and still compiles:
```

Author: Wrong fix: this explicitly does not work since the schema is not known.
```suggestion
// This also no longer compiles despite being valid at runtime:
```

view.root = [];
```

> For code which wants to continue using a unsafe API which can result in runtime errors if the data does not follow the schema, a new alternative has been added to address this use-case. A special type `UnsafeUnknownSchema` can no be used to opt into allowing all valid trees to be provided.

Reviewer 2: Nit
```suggestion
For code that wants to continue using an unsafe API, which can result in runtime errors if the data does not follow the schema, a new alternative has been added to address this use-case. A special type `UnsafeUnknownSchema` can now be used to opt into allowing all valid trees to be provided.
```

Note that this leaves ensuring the data is in schema up to the user.
For now these adjusted APIs can be accessed by casting the view to `TreeViewAlpha<UnsafeUnknownSchema>`.

> If stabilized this option wil be added to `TreeView` directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If stabilized, this option will be added to `TreeView` directly.
```

```typescript
const viewAlpha = view as TreeViewAlpha<UnsafeUnknownSchema>;
viewAlpha.initialize([]);
viewAlpha.root = [];
```

> Additionally this seems to have negatively impacted co recursive schema which declare an corecursive array as the first schema in the co-recursive cycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, this seems to have negatively impacted co-recursive schema which declare a co-recursive array as the first schema in the co-recursive cycle.
```

Like the TypeScript language our schema system is built on, we don't guarantee exactly which recursive type will compile, but will do our best to ensure useful recursive schema can be created easily.
In this case a slight change may be required to some recursive schema to get them to compile again:

For example this schema used to compile:

```typescript
class A extends sf.arrayRecursive("A", [() => B]) {}
{
	type _check = ValidateRecursiveSchema<typeof A>;
}
// Used to work, but breaks in this update.
class B extends sf.object("B", { x: A }) {}
```

But now you must use the recursive functions like `objectRecursive` for types which are co-recursive with an array in some cases.
In our example, it can be fixed as follows:

```typescript
class A extends sf.arrayRecursive("A", [() => B]) {}
{
	type _check = ValidateRecursiveSchema<typeof A>;
}
// Fixed corecursive type, using "Recursive" method variant to declare schema.
class B extends sf.objectRecursive("B", { x: A }) {}
{
	type _check = ValidateRecursiveSchema<typeof B>;
}
```

> Reversing which type is using the recursive utility also works (shown below).

Reviewer 2: Given that the above pattern is our actual recommendation, do we need to note this?

Author: This was mostly intended to direct people away from relying on this despite it compiling. We don't want people doing what I did in the past and thing they are clever and getting a better devx by using the recursive helpers less since it might break again but differently.

Author: I'm fine with removing it if you think that would be better. I partly just included it since it was interesting and should be discussed in this review.

Reviewer 2: Maybe just rephrase it to say something like "Note, while the following pattern may still compile, we recommend using the previous pattern instead"?

import { TinyliciousClient } from "@fluidframework/tinylicious-client";
import {
	SchemaFactory,
	SharedTree,
	TreeViewConfiguration,
	type TreeNodeSchema,
} from "fluid-framework";

// Create a ITree instance
const tinyliciousClient = new TinyliciousClient();
const { container } = await tinyliciousClient.createContainer({ initialObjects: {} }, "2");
const tree = await container.create(SharedTree);

const schemaFactory = new SchemaFactory("demo");

// Bad: This loses the schema aware type information. `: TreeNodeSchema` should be omitted to preserve strong typing.
const schema: TreeNodeSchema = schemaFactory.array(schemaFactory.number);
const config = new TreeViewConfiguration({ schema });

// This view is types as `TreeView<TreeNodeSchema>`, which does not work well since its missing the actual schema type information.
const view = tree.viewWith(config);
// Root is typed as `unknown` allowing invalid assignment operations.
view.root = "invalid";
view.root = {};
// Since all assignments are allowed, valid ones still work:
view.root = [];
```

After this change:

```typescript
// Root is now typed as `TreeNode | TreeLeafValue`, still allowing some invalid assignment operations.

> // In the future this should be prevented as well, since the type of the setter in this case should ne `never`

Reviewer 3: We can't generate different getter and setter types via mapped types though - so, will it even be possible to have the setter be `never` but the getter remain `TreeNode | TreeLeafValue`? Maybe it is possible in this one case because it is the base case, and we don't need to use a mapped type for the top level?

Author: We use mapped types for the schema aware API for object nodes: it someone for some reason decides to construct the type that is an object node with one of its field schema set to ImplicitFIeldSchema, or something like that, we could handle it someday by not generating a setter, which is mostly the same as a never setter. That is possible.

Additionally if we someday support UnsafeUnknownSchema being used in ObjectNode field schema, that actually works fine since that gives you both a get and set of `TreeNode | TreeLeaftValue` which is also expressible.

This does lead into an interesting API alternative, which as it only changes the alpha parts shouldn't block this:
We could make UnsafeUnknownSchema a branded or wrapped form of TreeNodeSchema, which would make it reasonable to use when defining schema as a runtime value. That could pair decently with such fields taking in branded input so you would have to do something like `MyNode.myunsafeField = intoUnsafe(foo)`.

Personally I think thats worse than just not using UnsafeUnknownSchema in node schema, and forcing use of something like Tree.trySetField(node, field, value), or Tree.tryEditArray(...) or Tree.tryDetachOptional(...) for non schema aware editing if we want to support it. Then we just make fields without known schema types readonly.

Reviewer 3: Interesting ideas...

viewAlpha.initialize([]);
viewAlpha.root = [];
```

Additionally this seems to have negatively impacted co recursive schema which declare an corecursive array as the first schema in the co-recursive cycle.
Like the TypeScript language our schema system is built on, we don't guarantee exactly which recursive type will compile, but will do our best to ensure useful recursive schema can be created easily.
In this case a slight change may be required to some recursive schema to get them to compile again:

For example this schema used to compile:

```typescript
class A extends sf.arrayRecursive("A", [() => B]) {}
{
	type _check = ValidateRecursiveSchema<typeof A>;
}
// Used to work, but breaks in this update.
class B extends sf.object("B", { x: A }) {}
```

But now you must use the recursive functions like `objectRecursive` for types which are co-recursive with an array in some cases.

> In our example, it can be fixed as follows:

Reviewer 3: FWIW I always just assumed this is how you were supposed to do it anyway. I don't think we made that explicitly clear anywhere but it makes sense, at least to me. The fact that either of the other two ways ever worked or still work feels like a hack to me. So, I don't feel that bad about this "breaking change", but I'm just one data point.

Reviewer 2: Same
